SPECIFIC AIMS
Heterogeneity in tumor cell and tumor microenvironment (TME) is considered a major contributor to two of the fundamental challenges facing clinical management of human cancers: (i) the inability to accurately predict clinical responses of a given patient to different therapy options at different points in the course of clinical management and (ii) the inability to control recurrence of drug-resistant tumors for given therapies. Heterogeneity across tumor cells is both mechanistic (e.g., genetic and epigenetic alterations) and functional (e.g., the cancer hallmarks). Genetic instability and drug-induced selection are thought to shape evolution of increasingly aggressive disease. Thus, a range of cellular phenotypes may coexist within a tumor cell population that can respond differently to therapy, or even respond similarly but for different reasons, making therapy decisions and a cure inherently difficult [1]. Furthermore, the tumor cell populations induce changes in the TME, creating imbalances and new functional interdependencies. Each of these considerations (genetics, epigenetis, and the TME) ultimately converge to alter tumor cell functional behavior - the underlying means by which cancer progresses and evades therapy. Therefore, it is necessary to (i) be able to quantify the functional heterogeneity of cancer cell response to therapy in relevant TME contexts for a given patient; and (ii) use this knowledge along with other tumor and patient characteristics to inform clinical management of that patient [2,3]. Therapy predictive strategies that embrace functional heterogeneity of tumor cells and TME components in each patient could move us toward these ideals; however, there is currently no assay or biomarker that achieves these goals. The long-term goal of this cross-disciplinary project is to fill this gap.
We have previously applied the microscale cis-co-culture (µC3) technology (Fig 1) to assess clinical response of multiple myeloma (MM) patients to therapies containing Velcade/Bortezomib, a clinical proteasome inhibitor. MM is the second most common and currently incurable hematological malignancy and is particularly well-suited to address these problems because of the known importance of TME and ready accessibility to tumor biopsy samples (both cancer cells and tumor-associated companion cells) as part of routine disease monitoring. However, the number of MM cells that can be obtained from individual patients varies considerably, necessitating assay miniaturization that also enables assay multiplexing. Thus, we have developed a microchannel assay platform in which both the MM cells and TME companion cell types from the same patient (“cis”) are analyzed together - a new design concept in the analysis of patient samples. The µC3 technology incorporates a patient’s own heterogeneity in both tumor cells and TME cells. We found that MM cell drug response to Velcade in the presence of TME cells segregated into two groups that matched clinical responses to bortezomib containing therapy (n=17 patients). In contrast, the same assay in the absence of companion cells (micro-mono-culture, µMC) failed to do so[4]. In the proposed study, we aim to further establish and significantly improve the resolution of the assay for Velcade (i.e., degree of response vs. +/-) as well as expand the assay to provide the much needed ability to predict other MM drugs. We will do this by incorporating a microscopy-based analysis termed cytoprofiling, which quantifies rich and unbiased signatures of MM cell response. The signatures of tumor cells before and after drug exposure will be used to build data-driven predictive models for each drug cancer therapy predictive modeling. We will further quantitatively define the potentially heterogeneous contribution of TME cell types to drug responses in MM cells by implementing a high-throughput randomized cis-co-culture (RµC3) assay (Aim 2). Both of these unbiased approaches utilize rich signatures to flexibly describe the natural heterogeneity and complexity of the biology, enabling complementary study of both tumor and TME heterogeneity in cancer.
Aim 1: Cytoprofiling to predict MM patient response to therapy
Optimize cytoprofiling and machine learning parameters for predicting Velcade response and further apply cytoprofiling to Revlimid and Dexamethasone, the other two drugs that together with Velcade constitute ~80% of initial MM therapy scenarios.
Aim 2: Contextual MM TME profiling via high-throughput randomized cis-co-culture 
Apply randomized cis-co-culture (RµC3) array technology to identify the cell contexts that specify patient level Velcade response and define the role of the critical TME cell type(s) in MM cell drug resistance.
RESEARCH STRATEGY
SIGNIFICANCE
A major problem of current cancer therapy is the concept that the route of tumor progression may be dictated by the choice of the initial therapy used for individual patients. Depending upon the treatment, different selective pressures influence tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME), including various non-tumor cell types and extracellular matrix (ECM) components, in different ways, resulting in patient- and therapy-sequence-dependent progression. Likewise, different subpopulations of tumor and non-tumor cells can interact to provide different functional capabilities and therapy response. Thus, tumor cell interactions with non-tumor cells and ECM of the TME are considered a major factor that drives variability in patient response for many therapeutically challenging cancers. One example is multiple myeloma (MM).
MM disease: MM is the second most common and currently incurable hematological malignancy[5]. MM is a plasma cell cancer that is known for its clonal origin (based on clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements and production of monoclonal antibodies) and a high degree of tumor cell heterogeneity [6,7][1]. Nevertheless ~75 to more than 90% of patients will show clinical benefits to VRD (Velcade, Revlimid, Dexamethasone) triple therapy [8,9] and is now recommended as a first-line therapy by some clinical experts [10]. Indeed, ~80% of MM patients seen at UW Carbone Cancer Center (UWCCC) receive these drugs individually, in various pairings, or as a triple therapy during initial treatments [4] and often show clinical response. Unfortunately, nearly all patients relapse from these therapies and we have no way to reliably predict which combination of available therapies will be effective next for each patient. The choice is further complicated given some patients may surprisingly respond well to drugs on which they previously relapsed. The result is a trial and error process that results in unnecessary side effects, lost time for patients, more advanced disease, a wide range of clinical practices, and potential alterations in the progression pathways of tumor cells in each patient. Thus, availability of a therapy predictive biomarker or assay for each therapy option could significantly contribute to better clinical management of this pressing clinical problem. Currently, no assay or biomarker has yet emerged that accurately predicts any of the available MM therapies for each patient. The current proposal addresses this significant unmet need.
MM Tumor microenvironment (TME): TME is thought to play important role in therapeutic response of MM [11,12]. As in the case with their normal plasma cell counterparts, MM cells undergo antigen-activation processes followed by homing to bone marrow where they produce copious amounts of monoclonal antibodies (“M” protein) and cause a variety of clinical problems, often referred to as CRAB (hypercalcimia, renal damage, anemia and bone lytic disease) [10]. MM cell interaction with many cell types in the bone marrow has been described, such as bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs), macrophages, eosinophils, and others [11,12]. For example, the role of BMSCs has been extensively studied where these tumor-associated “normal” companion cells produce high amounts of MM supporting factors (e.g., IL6) and also provide cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR). More recently, critical roles have been described for myeloma associated macrophages (MAMs) and their interaction with BMSCs to modify their tumor modifying phenotypes (M1, M2 and additional subtypes) [13–18]. Finally, significant co-localization of MM cells and eosinophils in bone marrow sections is reported, suggesting these “normal” cells promote MM cell survival [4,19]. Different TME cell types play a significant protective role for different drugs as was found in the case with neutrophils in protecting MM cells from Doxorubicin, Melphalan, and other MM drugs[20]. What is undefined at present is: Which of these (and possibly other) non-tumor TME cell types play critical roles in drug resistance in which individual patients and to which specific drugs?  The current proposal aims to develop quantitative strategies to answer these questions.
MM TME patient-to-patient heterogeneity: While much of the data supporting the concept of non-tumor TME cells contributing to MM cell behaviors, especially drug resistance, came from the analysis of interactions between MM cell lines and BMSC cell lines, our lab recently found that there is considerable patient-to-patient heterogeneity in function of non-tumor TME companion BMSCs [21,22]. We found that BMSCs obtained from 24 MM patients’ bone marrow are functionally distinct from those obtained from 22 normal marrows in their ability to cause cell survival NF-κB signaling in co-cultured MM cells. Moreover, we also observed significant heterogeneity among the BMSCs from MM patients, ranging from 0 to up to 6-fold NF-κB inducing activity. Importantly, primary MM cells obtained from individual patients each responded differently when cultured in parallel with BMSCs obtained from multiple different MM patients (i.e., different BMSC sources induced variable response in the same MM population). These studies strongly indicated that (i) both MM and BMSCs from individual patients are functionally heterogeneous and (ii) analysis of MM cells and TME cells obtained from the same patient may need to be analyzed together to derive clinically relevant responses - thus, the birth of the cis-co-culture concept. 
Microchannel design: To enable testing of this concept, we first developed a microscale co-culture device (Fig 2) [23]. The miniaturization of the assay was necessary because the number of MM cells that can be obtained from each patient bone marrow aspirate (~5-10 ml) varied considerably from as low as 10^5 cells to as many as >10^7 cells. Thus, the microscale assay was specifically designed to 1) enable testing of MM cells in all patient cases even with lower MM cell yields, 2) allow analysis of suspension (MM) cells, 3) enable culture of both MM and non-MM cell types to approximate in vivo TME cell-dependent interactions, and 4) be simple and quick to perform. To satisfy these criteria, we utilized tubeless passive pumping technology pioneered by Dr. Beebe’s group , enabling microfluidic capabilities without the need for extensive tubing, connections, mechanical pumps, or manipulators [24,25]. The central chamber was designed with a “bucket” to reduce fluid flow for retaining suspension MM cells. The dimension of the central chamber was designed to accommodate ~5000 cells so that many assays could be run in parallel from individual BM aspirates. To permit soluble interaction between MM cells and non-MM companion cells, side chambers were incorporated which were connected to the central chamber with diffusion ports that only permit soluble factor interactions between the central and side chambers. In our initial design, we did not incorporate cell-cell contact mediated interactions to keep the design relatively simple (this will now be addressed in Aim 2). The operation of the system is relatively simple - a researcher with little experience can master its operation after a few trials. Image capture and data analysis workflow was also developed to enable quantification of drug response of MM cells in the absence or presence of other “TME” cell types [23].  
Micro-cis-co-culture (µC3) assay for predicting Velcade drug response in MM patients: We next placed patient MM cells in the central chamber in the presence of the patient’s own tumor-associated companion (“TME”) cells in the side chambers. We refrained from artificially enriching the contribution of specific cell types present in each patient’s TME by placing the entire non-tumor mononuclear cell population in the side chambers to maximally maintain in vivo cell mixture that is different in different patients. We termed this assay, micro cis-co-culture (μC3) with the “cis” referring to both MM and other TME companion cells coming from the same patient [4]. The MM cells (and non-tumor cells in the side chambers) were then exposed to varying doses of Velcade, a clinically used proteasome inhibitor [12], and cell toxicity was assayed using fluorescence-based LIVE/DEAD assay [23] (Fig 3). We also compared MM cells response in the absence of companion cells (micro-mono-culture, μMC). While some patient samples behaved according to the prediction (i.e., improved survival of MM cells in the presence of TME cell types, e.g., Pt 329), others behaved in an unexpected manner (i.e., sensitization by the presence of TME cell types, e.g. Pt 429). We repeated this assay for a total of 18 patients (one sample was removed from the analysis due to the presence of unusual translocation) whose clinical responses to bortezomib-containing therapies were recorded by Dr. Callander according to International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria [26] (under IRB approval HO07403 protocol (Durie et al. 2006)). The operator of the in vitro assay was blinded to the clinical data until all the analyses were finished to eliminate operator bias, and the clinician was also blinded (double blinded study design). We found a striking correlation of ex vivo drug response with clinical response in μC3 for the 17 patients (Fig 4). Although the number of cases analyzed is still limited, k-means and Gaussian mixture clustering suggested that a bimodal distribution of ex vivo toxicity responses best fitted the μC3 data. Remarkably, this assay successfully stratified the patient groups into clinically responsive (complete response or partial response) and resistant (progressive disease or stable disease) categories to Velcade-containing therapies. In contrast, MM cell response in μMC showed a unimodal distribution, unable to separate clinical responses. Thus, it appears that the presence of non-tumor cells from the patient increased the ability of the assay to predict patient-level phenotype.  
Although our µC3 data above are encouraging, caution needs to be exercised in interpretation due to the limited number of patient samples analyzed. Moreover, its utility has not been tested in a larger cohort for Velcade and for other MM therapy drugs. Finally, CAM-DR parameters have not been incorporated into the design, thus potentially limiting its utility to other drugs. Thus, further improvements may be needed to fully capitalize on our encouraging results - the focus of proposed Aim 1. 
Chemo-sensitivity and resistance assays (CSRAs) development: Previously, toward the development of therapy-predictive CSRAs, multiple research groups have employed patient cancer samples and different assay platforms, including clonogenic cell survival assays, MTT assays, capillary cloning system assays, subrenal capsule assays, ChemoFX, and others [27][2,28]. In summary, a working group of the American Society of Clinical Oncology reviewed all reported CSRAs performed on patient tumor samples representing different cancer types in 2004 and again in 2011 and reported that they did not identify any CSRAs for which the evidence base is sufficient to support use in oncology practice [2,28]. Nevertheless, there is a continual call from the clinical community for an effective method able to predict clinical responses to specific therapies [29–31]. This reflects the obvious opportunities such predictive assays could provide in (i) reducing patient burden of ineffective drugs (unnecessary side effects with little therapeutic gains, increased financial burdens of therapy, and potential progression of disease during ineffective therapy), (ii) identification of multiple effective drugs before the initial therapy begins, (iii) ability to tailor a therapy sequence, and (iv) providing psychological benefits to patients, families/friends and clinicians of knowing the future clinical response. Our μC3 assay represents a unique approach by incorporating the patient’s own TME components into the assay. As such, it might provide an important entry point for expanding our capability in predicting patient response to Velcade and other MM drugs (Aim 1) and improving our understanding of the basic biology of TME influence on therapeutic response in individual MM patients (Aim 2). Finally, our study might also stimulate others to incorporate the cis-co-culture concept into CSRA development for different human cancer types. 
INNOVATION
Technological Innovations:
A tubeless “open-microfluidic” device design for simpler and more robust assays.
The micro-cis-co-culture (μC3) system to analyze a limited number of cancer cells and their associated TME cell types in a single assay device. 
Application of a highly quantitative, high-content, unbiased, cytoprofiling approach, for the first time to our knowledge, to cancer therapy prediction.
A new approach to immobilize non-adherent cells to enable high-content imaging endpoints for each individual cell before and after drug treatment, greatly increasing the statistical power by factor of 100-1000 fold over analogous population-based assays.
Randomized microwell cis-co-culture (RµC3) to simultaneously profile >1000 of cellular contexts for both soluble and cell-cell contact mediated alterations in cancer cell drug response.
Micropipetting technology to enable isolation of individual cells of interest out of RµC3 devices for cell phenotyping and molecular and gene expression profiling.
Biological Innovations:
An ex vivo assay that includes the patient’s cancer cells and their own TME companion cells to investigate the impact of patient’s own cancer TME cell types - a major distinction from previous CSRA platforms.
The use of a microscale ex vivo culture device to enable rapid accumulation of soluble factors to improve communication between MM tumor cells and non-tumor companion cells.
A randomized cis-co-culture approach to quantitatively and functionally assess the individual and combined influences of TME cell types on tumor cell response to therapy within each patient.
APPROACH
The proposed project embraces the natural complexity of both the cancer (Aim 1) and the TME (Aim 2) (Fig x), studying heterogeneity in therapy response from a functional perspective directly on patient samples. Aim 1 utilizes a data-driven approach to predicting patient response that can “learn” which tumor cells and the characteristics of those tumor cells are most predictive of patient response, avoiding the assumption that all tumor cells are equal and that cell-death is the only relevant predictor of patient response. Aim 2 takes a complementary approach, focusing on the heterogeneity of interactions in the TME and determining which (and to what degree) non-tumor cell types influence tumor cell survival (+ and -). This complementary strategy enables evaluation of the balance of between different sources of functional heterogeneity that directly influence patient response and the development of resistance. 
Aim 1: Cytoprofiling to Predict MM Patient Response to Therapeutic Options
Rationale: As noted above, the μC3 assay successfully segregated individual MM patients’ response to Velcade therapies (Fig 4). However, we do not know why this worked for Velcade in our initial patient cohort.  Moreover, we do not know if this would work for other MM drugs. Most importantly, if and when this assay fails to predict clinical responses in future studies (by measuring LIVE/DEAD fractions alone), we would not know how to fix it because of the lack of mechanistic understanding. Thus, a logical extension of this inquiry is to ask: Can we improve the current µC3 assay so that the likelihood of future failure is minimized and if it fails, we can predict why? Our approach attempts to learn from the previous decades of challenges in CSRA development which were predominantly based upon the measurement of tumor cell survival alone [28,30]. 
We propose to integrate cytoprofiling into our current µC3 approach, and quantify ~500-2000 additional single-cell measures in addition to LIVE/DEAD response. Given the orders of magnitude of increased information, we hypothesize that cytoprofiling will be more comprehensive, sensitive, and flexible than a simple LIVE/DEAD assay for accurately predicting therapeutic outcomes of individual patients to different MM drugs. The single-cell approach is also expected to provide a ~100-1000 fold increase in statistical power over population-averaged approaches [32–34]. Using this approach, specific response signatures of cells can often be described using a surprisingly small number of features. For example, Jones et al. applied this general approach in an RNAi screen to describe 14 diverse phenotypes within a single cell line with ~5-20 features per phenotype [32–34]. Given the advantages of “big data”, we will be able to assume a less biased and more data-driven approach to developing readouts that are predictive of patient response. This greatly increases our likelihood of success, opportunity for generating new insights, and potential to reveal underlying mechanistic insights. Furthermore, the approach can leverage a heterogeneous view of the tumor cell population for making more accurate patient-level predictions instead of assuming that all tumor cells are the same or that cell death is the only relevant predictor of patient response - a fundamental difference with past approaches to CSRA development. The goals are to develop a multidrug predictive CSRA for future prospective clinical trials and establish which features of tumor cell response are predictive of patient response for future investigation.
Preliminary Data: 
Software for single-cell feature extraction to enable cell categorization - In order to quantify the multitude of staining and morphological characteristics of each individual cell and cell compartment, we have developed a software called JEX (Fig x). JEX is an open-source, cross-platform, java-based software that enables the development, application, and sharing of automated workflows for data management, data analysis, and machine learning. Development of JEX has been led by Dr. Warrick since 2006, and it has been used in many publications (currently 14) for a range of applications including the data management and analysis for the µC3 device [4,23]. We are using JEX (vs. other capable batch softwares such as KNIME, CellProfiler, and Icy) for its additional data-management capabilities, continuity with previous work on this project, and to enable rapid and integration of additional cell feature measurements we are developing to exploit relationships of intensity distributions between image channels. JEX also has the capability to automate data machine learning tasks via R and Weka and has built-in capabilities for cluster computing via the UW Center for High-Throughput Computing (CHTC, see facilities and environment description).
Cytoprofiling testing: Using a JEX workflow, we performed a proof-of-principle study and applied cytoprofiling to distinguish primary T-cells from two different mouse strains that differ only by a 3-amino acid substitution in IκBα (inhibitor of NF-κB) that are functionally different (the mutant T cells cannot mount effective anti-viral CD8 response in vivo) but cannot be distinguished through many other quantitative methods (flow cytometry with many CD markers, western blots, and immunostaining analyses) [35]. Significantly, cytoprofiling analysis was able to define an RandomForest Model consisting of 25 small trees (5 features each, with replacement) that could correctly classify, on average, 83% data across all 10-fold cross-validation sets (total n = 5476 primary T cells in identically treated populations) as either originating from the wild-type or mutant mice (Fig 7). Notably, despite lack of success with other nuclear localization analysis and in accordance with the mouse model, the data-driven approach suggested that of the various ~1200 features measured for each cell, relative distribution of p65 stain to the nuclear stain was a highly important feature (rank ~5). A relatively small set of ~10 features were responsible for the vast majority (80%) of the predictive power. Although per-cell predictions are informative, the goal is to predict if cells obtained from a new mouse (i.e., new patient) exhibit the model signature of either WT or MT (i.e., a responder or non-responder). Given a new patient and an well-trained model, if more cells in the µC3 assay are thought to exhibit the signature of a responder vs a non-responder for that drug, we would predict the patient to respond (and vice versa). Similarly, the proportion of cells in the sample predicted to be from a responding vs non responding patient likely be indicative of the degree of response. Using binomial statistics as a simple first order estimate, given ~15,000 cells per patient per drug, a single-cell accuracy of only 51% in our model (i.e., only slightly better than random) would still be sufficient to confidently (p < 0.05) classify the patient as a responder. Monte Carlo simulations will be performed more accurately estimate this confidence in the proposal. Thus, results demonstrate the feasibility of our established cytoprofiling workflow and illustrate how the ensemble of measures and high-numbers of single-cell observations can generate a highly sensitive method for discriminating even highly similar cell populations using surprisingly few metrics.
Experimental approach:
Cytoprofiling of Velcade (V) response: We will first advance upon our existing µC3 LIVE/DEAD assay by incorporating cytoprofiling workflow to derive response signatures that enable quantitative prediction of Velcade (V) therapies for individual MM patients. We will use a single optimized dose of V (100 nM) and the vehicle control under 2 different culture conditions (with and without non-tumor “TME” cells on side chambers). Each condition will be tested in triplicate for a total of 12 tests per patient. 
Bone marrow aspirates will be drawn by Dr. Callander. We will obtain samples from newly diagnosed or at first relapse patients who have not been on Velcade (V)-containing therapy before and will be on a V-containing therapy next to keep the patient variables at minimum while maintaining sufficient supply of patient samples. We will exclude patients who have undergone autologous or allograft bone marrow transplantation to further minimize the patient variables. A research staff in Miyamoto lab will obtain the sample according to the IRB approved protocol (#HO0-7403). Lab researchers are blinded to the patient information, except for the identifier number generated by Dr. Callander according to the protocol. The samples are processed in the Miyamoto lab (designated for primary patient sample processing) to isolate MM cells (using anti-CD138 antibody-coated magnetic beads) and non-tumor companion cells (CD138- mononuclear cells) to >95-98% purity (based on FACS analysis). Analogous to our previous µC3 design[4], 5,000 CD138+ MM cells will be placed in the central culture chamber and 5,000 CD138- non-MM cells will be placed in each side chamber. The raw device inserts shown in the Fig x schematic are fixed to the bottom of glass-bottom Petri dishes and sterilized via UV. Cells will be immobilized in each chamber beneath a soft agar overlay so that cells can be identified and quantified at multiple timepoints. After seeding, cells are incubated overnight, treated (100 nM V or vehicle control), imaged (Fig X) on the automated microscope, and quantified (JEX, Fig x) prior to drug treatment and again at 24 hours after treatment (end of experiment) (Fig x). Automated imaging will require roughly 1.5 hr per patient per day for all 24 conditions. The number of devices per Petri dish is limited to 4 to keep time out of the incubator to < 20 mins per dish. The study will accumulate a total of ~10 TB of raw uncompressed image data over ~50 patients (a target size for the first 2-3 years, see below for justification of sample size). This level of data collection is feasible with current experiences of the collaborative team. The data collected will be used to develop machine learning predictive models (see Data Analysis and Management section below).  
Revlimid/Lenalidomide (R) and Dexamethasone (D) responses: Once we develop working experiences with V in the first year, we will begin to develop similar models to predict therapeutic response to Revlimid/Lenalidomide (R) and Dexamethasone (D) whose usage along with V form the backbone of therapy upon diagnosis and initial relapse (e.g., >80% of patients in our study at UW-Madison [4]). The initial phase of this study is to choose an optimal culture condition (mono-culture or cis-co-culture) and dose for R and D treatments to streamline subsequent studies. Although R and other immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) are generally thought to work through the microenvironment [36,37], recent studies have clarified the cell death mechanism within MM cells [38]. Indeed, Revlimid clearly showed cytotoxicity to some patient MM cells when non-tumor companion cells were also present in our µC3 assay (e.g., Pt. 442, Fig x). This is consistent with the notion that most MM drugs also impart anti-MM effects at least in part via their actions on TME [5,11]. We will initially characterize ex vivo MM cell response to 3 different concentrations of R and D (and a vehicle control), under 2 different culture conditions (with and without non-tumor cells). Each condition will be tested in triplicate for a total of 42 tests per patient. Machine learning models that best predict therapy responses will also be developed for these major MM drugs and compared to the predictability of LIVE/DEAD assay alone.
The ultimate goal of this aim toward the end of the proposed funding period is to have established an assay workflow so that all patient samples will be analyzed for V, R and D (and possibly their double and triple combinations) in parallel to extract therapy relevant information from individual MM patients to enable future prospective clinical trials.
Data Analysis and Management: 
The imaging protocol and microscopy equipment are well-defined and repeatable (e.g., exposure times, and LED-based fluorescence) to keep microscopy parameters consistent across experiments. Raw data will be stored on the oncology departments RAID storage servers. All information will be stored and utilized in accordance with HIPAA guidelines.
Methods for image analysis and feature extraction are now established in JEX (Figs. x); thus, the two remaining primary tasks are to determine an optimal machine learning strategy and to establish estimates of cytoprofiling performance. The primary machine learning challenge is to predict patient-level therapy response based upon the measured ex vivo response of individual cells to drugs included in the therapy. Dr. Page will serve as a collaborator/consultant (see his support letter) as he is a leading expert in bioinformatics and machine learning [39–43].
Tumor cell availability: The number of tumor cells per patient limits the number of possible experimental conditions (generally upwards of 500k per patient but sometimes as low as ~200k for patients in our proposed cohort). Aim 1 requires 120k while Aim 2 requires 60k; thus, by having two full time researchers conducting one aim each and an independent scientist (50%) coordinating their daily activities, we expect to have the capacity to perform Aims 1 and 2 in parallel.
Data description: Clinical response (CR - complete response, PR - partial response, SD - stable disease and PD - progressive disease, the durability of response), and other clinical data (sex, age, type of M protein, plasma cell counts, therapy types, etc.) will be compiled by Dr. Callander blinded to lab results according to International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria [26] as we have done for our earlier work [4]. We previously combined CR and PR as "sensitive" and SD and PD as "resistant" due to limited sample size [4]. Because we will be entering more samples in the current design, we will use all four classifications as well as explore individual clinical outcomes and their response durations as separate responses. Cytoprofiling data will be acquired before and after drug treatment for each cell, thus predictions can be made based on features acquired prior to and after drug treatment as well as from calculated changes (e.g., ratiometric or difference) in features from before to after. Each row of the patient cytoprofiling data table represents the information for a single cell (Fig x). The columns indicate the ~1000 measured features as well as the class of tumor from which the cells originated (i.e., CR, PR, SD or PD to therapy containing the drug of interest). We will also add ‘% change in live fraction’ as a calculated feature (column) of the table. Thus, all cells from a particular patient will have identical values for ‘% change in live fraction’ while values across patients will vary. The ability to include this feature in our table ensures that our machine learning approaches (avoiding of overfitting) will do no worse than our previous approach which utilized ‘% change in live fraction’ alone to predict patient response [4].   
Sample size: We expect to quantify a total of ~200,000 MM cells per patient across ~50 patients for a total of ~10,000,000 cells or examples on which to develop and test our approach for this aim for each of V, R and D drugs. Newly diagnosed MM patients seen by Dr. Callander represent 20-30 per year on average. More patients will be at first relapse to V, R and/or D drugs (due to referrals). Once the doses of R and D are optimized, analysis of all three drugs in parallel will become feasible. Based upon the previous experience of our team with a similar machine learning challenge, we expect 50 patients for each drug to provide sufficient diversity in our data for algorithms that are robust to overfitting (e.g., linear support vector machines and naïve Bayes) [44]. However, our table contains 10,000,000 rows of data instead of just 50 (i.e., one for each cell instead of one for each patient). Although we still require 50 patients to provide diversity for controlling a range of confounding factors such as inherent differences from patient-to-patient, sample preparation, and variability in cell staining or imaging, our single-cell approach provides us many more examples than features for predicting the origin of the tumor cells (i.e., whether they were obtained from a responding or nonresponding patient) which allows us to test more advanced approaches that can make predictions of more complex systems. However, if we need more samples to evaluate assay performance (see below for “Performance Characterization”), we will enter more samples. Our IRB approval (#HO0-7403) allows us to analyze up to 300 MM patient samples, and based on our record over the last 10 years of collaborative study with Dr. Callander, patient accrual of 50 or more patients per year will not be a limiting factor.
Machine learning strategy: We will initially employ “linear” approaches such as linear support vector machines and naïve Bayes given they are generally robust to overfitting and may provide sufficient performance. The potential pitfall of these approaches is that the true (unknown) underlying model that we seek to recover may be “non-linear”, for example because of interactions among variables. Therefore, we will also explore random forests and k-nearest neighbor classifiers that, can accurately address many kinds of interactions, remain relatively robust against overfitting in practice, and have been shown to be effective in the context of cytoprofiling [32]. We will also consider other types of algorithms and approaches for predicting patient-level response from single-cell responses as appropriate.
Performance characterization: We will perform leave-one-out cross-validation at the patient-level (i.e., leave-one-patient-out), leaving the entire set of cells from each patient out of the dataset exactly once for testing, training the model on the remaining cells, and predicting the class of each cell in the patient left out and thus also the class of the tumor (i.e., sensitive or resistant patient). The predictions are pooled to create an overall accuracy estimate, 2-by-2 contingency table, and receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve for the method on the task. Bootstrapping will be used to obtain confidence intervals on the ROC curve and accuracy estimate, by repeating the entire cross-validation process over different bootstrap samples of the data. We will also generate learning curves that plot number of patients on the x-axis and percent correctly classified on the y-axis (Fig x). Such curves will help us assess, “What is the current prediction accuracy and will analysis of more patients significantly improve that accuracy?” and “Can we expect to predict therapy response for drug X with sufficient accuracy to warrant a prospective trial?” Thus, machine learning curves will be generated for each drug-dosage-culture-algorithm combination. 
Expected Outcomes and Alternatives: 
Our research team is well acquainted with the many different factors and parameters necessary for consistent and sustained microscale culture as well as well-equipped to address them. Important parameters to be aware of include ready diffusion of gas through the PDMS microwells, cell-to-volume ratio, evaporation, nutrient depletion and waste accumulation, surface adsorption of protein, and PDMS absorption of small lipophilic molecules [45]. Each of these variables has already been addressed with the current μC3 design.
The primary goals of Aim 1 are to (i) develop response signatures that best predict V, R and D therapies, and (ii) determine how the presence of non-tumor companion cells improves/modifies the outcomes for any of the drugs (Fig x). We hypothesize that the presence of non-tumor TME cells in side chambers will have a major impact (especially for V) based on the current µC3 assay data [4] and based on the known roles of TME in MM therapy response. In the previous µC3 LIVE/DEAD assay [4], correlation between ex vivo response and clinical response was obtained even when the patients were treated with therapies that contained V and other drugs. Such correlation may be unique to V and may not prove useful for other drugs by using LIVE/DEAD readout alone. Identification of response signatures for each drug should resolve this problem given the large dimensions of data (rather than single LIVE/DEAD parameter) that will be interrogated for generation of optimal predictive model development. We also predict that different response signatures will emerge for V vs. D vs. R. This is because different TME cell types, their combinations, and a multitude of factors produced by them likely influence the drug response to individual MM drugs in individual patients (to be investigated in Aim 2).
Future directions of Aim 1 are many. First, feasible and optimal approaches for a subsequent prospective clinical trial will be developed to test the performance of acquired cytoprofiling models for single drug therapies in either newly diagnosed and/or relapsed patient populations. Second, we will also attempt to generate models that predict double and triple drug combination therapies. This will thus cover ~80% of initial MM therapy scenarios at UW-Madison, and likely at other institutions, and thus could have significant impact on management of MM patients. Third, we will also aim to develop response signatures for other frequently used MM therapy drugs (e.g., melphalan, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, calfilzomib, pomalidomide). Finally, we will also perform longitudinal study where each patient’s best single or drug combinations will be predicted prior to the beginning of the first therapy, and subsequent bone marrow samples (post recurrence, or even prior) will be used to predict the next best therapy to test the improvement in overall survival of MM patients.
It is possible that useful information of MM patient response also resides within the CD138- non-MM cell populations. To this end, we will be simultaneously capturing images of non-MM cells in side channels for later cell feature extraction and machine learning in anticipation of non-MM cells providing critical information for VRD therapies. This data will be used to aid interpretation and prediction of data from Aim 2.
In the worse case scenario, even if we fail to develop optimal cytoprofiling models for any of the VRD therapies, we will be minimally obtaining live fraction data.  As such, we will be validating our initial µC3 data with V, along with R and D, therapies to determine how simple live fraction analysis would be useful for predicting clinical response of any of the therapy options, as well as comparing mono to co-culture for the other drugs to assess influence of the TME for those drugs as done with V in the previous study.
Aim 2: Contextual MM TME Profiling via High-throughput Randomized Cis-co-culture (RµC3)
Rationale: 
One of the next logical and important questions that arises from our µC3 data (Fig x) is, “Can we define which one or combination of TME cells are modulating MM cells’ behaviors to mirror patient’s clinical response?” Further, can we do this for each patient to quantify patient-to-patient differences in TME influence upon therapy response? We envision that the cell-cell and secreted factor interactions within the μC3 system could be highly complex (different cell types, different fractions of each of these cell types, factors produced by each of these cell types, multitudes of interactions of different factors and different cell types). It is unlikely that one cell type or one factor controls the outcome of such a combinatorial scenario for different therapies for all patients. It follows then that manual implementation of all possible co-culture scenarios (fractionated cell types and co-culture combinations and soluble factor competition or knockdown strategies) quickly becomes infeasible for each patient and therefore a more efficient and unbiased approach is needed to identify the critical non-tumor cell type(s) and cell combination(s). To enable efficient and unbiased identification of therapeutically influential TME contexts within each patient sample, we will implement the randomized cis-co-culture (RµC3) technology. RµC3 enables parallel testing thousands of co-culture conditions using microwell-based technology we have developed (Fig 5, [46]).
We will quantify the RµC3 arrays to determine the influence of different cell types on MM cell resistance to Velcade. To do this we must determine two things, which tumors cell lived or died and what cell types were in cis-co-culture with each of those tumor cells. The use of antibodies to identify the wide range of non-tumor cell types would be logistically infeasible. Instead, we propose an approach much more similar to hematopathology where a small number of stains (live-cell fluorescent labels) and rich set of morphological characteristics (cytoprofiling signature) to determine cell-type via machine learning classification. We will then use a semi-automated single-cell aspirator we have implemented to remove the cells for off-chip analysis to definitively validate the identity of the non-tumor cell type(s) that most influence drug resistance and profile potential mechanisms of action. The primary goals of this aim are to integrate the existing components into a workflow for quantitative analysis of TME cell types (type, number, and relative fraction) and to functionally assess which cell type(s) significantly influence MM Velcade response in each patient and to what degree.
Preliminary Data: 
Randomized cis-co-culture device (RµC3): The RµC3 device integrates microwell array technology we have used previously [46] with the µC3 approach. The microwell-array based approach enables tens of thousands of separate cultures experiments from a single patient sample while requiring only minutes to set up using a standard micropipette (i.e., no pumps, valves, and tubing common to some technologies). Fig 6 illustrates an RµC3 device seeded with fluorescently labeled MM and stromal cells.
Semi-automated single-cell aspirator: Fig 9 illustrates our ability to aspirate individual cells using a custom, semi-automated micropipette. This aspirator design utilizes the automated axes of the microscope to keep the aspirator constantly in the microscope field of view and enable highly precise x-y-z control of the pipette position over the microwell array. The microwells protect surrounding cells from inadvertantly being aspirated, enabling highly pure isolation [47]. To increase throughput, multiple cells of a single-type are aspirated sequentially and then dispensed at once into a 0.2 µL tube. Further optimization is underway to automatically identify and traverse locations to aspirate by importing X-Y coordinates from image analysis into the microscope software. Fundamentally, this technology enables us to pick out any cell of interest for validation and deeper biochemical characterization off-chip.
Non-tumor cell identification: Fig 7 illustrates our capability to generate data for training a computational model to automatically identify non-tumor cells types in bone marrow aspirates. The images show a sample that was stained with Hoechst and CellTracker Red, imaged for fluorescence, then stained by UW hematopathology with Giemsa (which removes the fluorescent dyes), and imaged again using brightfield microscopy. The images are then digitally registered to so that the exact same nucleated cells from the Giemsa image can be identified in the fluorescent image. Fig 8 illustrates examples of contrasting morphologies that will be annotated by Dr. Yang to train our model. This method contrasts with antibody labeling approaches which tend to be more variable than chemical labels, may be bioactivate to certain cell populations, would require too many fluorescent channels for realistically discriminating the many potential cell types of the TME, and would be less consistent with the gold-standard approaches of hematopathology for cell identification. We will specifically include examples of eosinophils, macrophages, neutrophils, and BMSCs in our training set given the literature suggests these cell types are highly likely to influence tumor cell survival (see Significance section). However, to our knowledge, the functional impact of these cell types in individual patients on therapy response has yet to be studied. 
Experimental approach:
MM and non-MM cells will be isolated from each patient as described under Aim 1. Immediately prior to seeding, all cells will be labeled with Hoechst 33342 (Ex/Em - 350/461) at 1:20,000 dilution which we have previously optimized for sufficient intensity while avoiding cytopathology in previous 24 hr time lapse imaging experiments [46]. The CD138+ MM cells will be additionally labeled using DiR long-term live-cell membrane labeling tracer dye (Ex/Em - 750/780 nm) to discriminate them from non-tumor cells. All “non-tumor” cells will be labeled with CellTrace Far Red long-term tracer dye (Ex/Em - 630/661) to define the cytoplasm and aid cell type identification. In a preliminary test of our proposed fluorescent labeling approach, we found no significant difference in patient sample viability as a result of Hoechst, CellTracker Red, and DiR co-labeling over 24 hours (78% no-stain, 79% stained).
The initial RµC3 device design will be consisted of an array of 2500 microwells (50 X 50 X 50 µm each) covering an 6 mm diameter area surrounded by a groove to locally constrain small droplets of fluid (~10-100 µL) over the array and enable pipette-based treatments and washing. An array of 12 RµC3 devices fit in the footprint of a single 1 X 3 in glass slide. Each RµC3 device will be overlaid with a 50 µL suspension of MM and non-MM cells such that various random combinations of each cell type settle into the microwells. Based upon random seeding statistics and previous experience, on average 2250 of the 2500 microwells per device will be occupied by between 1 and 6 cells each; ~510, 640, 530, 330, 170, and 70 wells containing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 cells, respectively. 12 hours after initial seeding in the RµC3 device, the cultures will be treated with 100 nM of V, which we previously defined to be optimal and reflects patients’ plasma concentration [4].  Microwells will be sealed with a glass lid over the top of the wells to prevent fluid exchanges, thus preventing subsequent soluble communication between wells as done previously [46]. Imaging for this study will occur immediately before and 24 hours after drug treatment. Thus, microwells are leveraged to efficiently and simply create a very large spectrum of independent “TME” contexts (with many internally controlled replicates) to determine the impacts on MM cell drug responses.
We will identify the non-tumor cell types within the RµC3 microwells by cytoprofiling, which enables a flexible and automated approach to cell identification with minimal perturbation of the cells. After cell identification and quantification of tumor cell viability we will again utilize computational approaches to “learn” which non-tumor cell types positively or negatively influence tumor cell response. This data will provide us with completely new information regarding the variability, degree, and direction (+/-) of non-tumor cell influence within and across MM patients. We will then perform off-chip biochemical analyses of up to three of the most influential cell types (or cell-type combinations). The single cell aspirator enables transfer and segregation of ~100-150 individual cells per hour. To further facilitate this capability, we will also implement the microwell “addressing” methodology described by Love et al. [48], which includes rotated microwells within the array to provide a unique address for each microwell. Thus, we will be able to unambiguously identify and isolate a single cell of interest for downstream cell identification by cell surface marker staining (i.e., CD markers) and cell lineage-specific gene expression by qRT-PCR. Specific secreted factors from individual cell types that have previously been implicated to promote MM cell survival from in the literature will be analyzed by means of neutralizing antibodies to show causation. These analyses will enable future experiments using immunomagnetic capture and µC3 to further validate their functional significance in imparting Velcade resistance phenotype in MM cells.
Data Analysis and Management: 
Data description: Each µC3 and µMC culture will result in a measurement of live cell fraction (LF) for the tumor cells (LF = #  Live / # Total). For both µC3 and µMC, LF from the Velcade treated condition will be normalized by LF from the untreated control to obtain relative LF (rLF = LF_Tx / LF_Control). Data from RµC3 devices will consist of two tables of data, 1 for tumor cells and one for non-tumor cells. Each row in the tables represents a cell while the columns represent the measurements. The tumor cell measurements will initially consist of calcein AM (live) intensity, ethidium bromide (dead) intensity, cell ID, and ID of the microwell in which it resides. Non-tumor cell data will initially consist of ~1000 single-cell features, the cell ID, and the ID of the microwell in which it resided for cross referencing between tables. All features will be standardized per patient across conditions by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. A trained computational model will be used to assign a “cell type” to each non-tumor cell. The tumor cell table will have a column for each cell type. The number of cells of that type in cis-co-culture with the tumor cell will be recorded in the cell-type columns, thereby defining the “cis-co-culture context”. The final column will record whether the tumor cell lived or died in response to treatment (as quantified previously).
Hematopathological and automated identification of non-tumor cells: Dr. Yang (see support letter) has agreed to annotate images of cells stained using Giemsa by UW clinical hematopathology. The images of individual cells are randomly chosen across patients. These images also have corresponding fluorescence images of the same cells (Hoechst & CellTrace Far Red, see preliminary data for feasibility). The single-cell features will be formatted via JEX for use in CellProfiler Analyst (CPA) [32,49], a well-established and rich software tool designed specifically to classify cellular phenotypes. The pathologist will use CPA to assign cell types for training a model to predict cell type labels from single-cell features. CPA then applies the model to assign cell types to the rest of the unlabeled non-tumor cells for subsequent analysis of cis-co-culture effects. CPA performs cross-fold validation to estimate cell-type prediction accuracy. In addition, Dr. Yang will verify performance on 50 randomly selected test cells from each category.
Number of experimental conditions and technical replicates: Our previous experience with the µC3 and µMC suggests technical variability is extremely small compared to patient-to-patient variability such that triplicate technical replicates are more than adequate to establish a robust estimate of rLF for µC3 and µMC assays per patient. We suspect a similar trend for RµC3. However, to improve coverage over a broader range of cis-co-culture contexts for relatively low frequency cell categories, we will perform 10 technical replicates of the treatment and control groups (20 RµC3 devices total). This will produce ~22,500 microwell cis-co-cultures per condition. Thus, events even at a very low frequency of ~0.1% will be observed in ~22 microwells, establishing a limit of the assay for determining statistical significance for very rare individual cell types and excessively complex combinations of cells.
Contextual profiling analysis to identify non-MM cell categories and category combinations that significantly protect or sensitize MM cells to Velcade: Analysis within patients - Analysis will be performed using the tumor cell data table (see data description, ~ 10-25 features and 22,000 examples) to predict tumor cell survival based upon the presence of non-tumor cell types. Given the number of examples highly outnumber the features, we can likely explore a variety of “linear” and “non-linear” modeling approaches. However, we will first leverage the probabilistic nature of Naive Bayes to test for significant independent influence of each individual cell type (e.g., regardless of what other cell types are present in the microwell, cell type X was associated with significantly increased/decreased tumor cell survival/death). To enable modeling of non-linear interactions, we will use Tree-Augmented Naive Bayes to test for significance of combinations of non-tumors on tumor cell survival (e.g., it is possible cell type A must be with cell type B to enhance tumor cell survival/death). The two methods will be assessed using 10-fold cross-fold validation and compared using ROC and PR curve analysis as well as the F1 statistic to choose the more appropriate modeling approach. The parameter probabilities will be used to assess the level of significance of independent and conditional non-tumor cell influence on tumor cell viability using ____. Analysis across patients - To assess how consistently a cell type or cell type combination influences tumor cell drug response across patients we will take the per-patient statistically standardized average tumor-cell viability for each cell type and cell type combination and perform rank order statistics. Specifically, we will use Kruskal-Wallis and, if appropriate, Mann-Whitney with Holmes correction for multiple comparisons. Given preliminary data suggested a Given the new and rich nature of this data, experienced team of data analysts, and extensive statistical core resources at hand, we expect many other questions and hypotheses will be explored by each of the students and researchers involved.
Expected Outcomes and Alternatives:
An optimal outcome of the proposed study is the consistent identification of non-MM TME cell type(s) that most influence the MM cell Velcade response across MM patients.  This will be detected by identifying a set of MM and non-MM cell combinations in microwells whose MM cell V response reflects that seen in μC3 condition. Such identification will inform how many ways (i.e., “micro” TME contexts) that MM cells can be influenced by non-tumor cells to behave according to patient’s therapy response - an impactful outcome. This also informs how many different ways MM cells can become resistant or sensitive to a therapeutic drug in each patient. We expect to have no technical problems in identifying the specific non-MM cell types as different cell lineages display well-established cell surface CD markers and express lineage-restricted genes that are readily defined by literature search. Identification of TME cell type(s) will also inform potential future drug targets and the assay developed here will provide the companion test to identify the patients most likely to respond to a therapy targeting such cell type(s).
To further enable the identification of critical drug targets, it would be important to determine secreted factors and potential direct cell-cell contact mediators that can confer such drug response activities in MM cells. If a cell type is a suspected one (e.g., BMSC or eosinophil), we will initially use neutralizing antibodies to attenuate suspected secreted factor activity (e.g., IL6 for BMSC, APRIL for eosinophil) within the context of RµC3.  If such a candidate approach fails, we will recapitulate the appropriate combinations of MM and specific types of non-MM cells in a scale larger than microwells so that secreted factors can be analyzed by either MS/MS analysis or cytokine array analysis as we have done previously for BMSC analysis [21,22]. By means of neutralizing antibodies, we will again aim to induce sensitization of drug resistant MM cell populations to demonstrate causation. 
Another important future direction of the positive outcome of this aim is to test the hypothesis that different cellular TME contexts influence patient level clinical responses to different MM drugs. Thus, we will also evaluate the differences of cell types that contribute to drug responses to Revlimid (R) and Dexamethasone (D) in a similar fashion as above (see Aim 1 for the rationale for the choice of these drugs). We expect to identify potentially different cell and cell combinations to emerge as critical for different MM drug responses. Alternatively, a similar cell type or set of cell types could emerge as important in inducing MM resistance to different drugs. Either of these outcomes will have significant implication in future intervention of their influences as well as improving the understanding of MM biology in real patient scenarios.
A least desirable outcome would be that the RµC3 approach does not identify non-MM cell or cell combinations that are sufficient to recapitulate C3-like response in MM cells. One possibility is that rare cells with potential functional significance (e.g., tumor propagating pre-PC cells, [50]) do not exist in high enough frequencies to be incorporated. Expanding the area within each microcell may help re-evaluate the definition of categories. We will know such an outcome within the first 1-2 years, and thus we will modify our microwell dimensions and replicates to accommodate such changes in the remainder of the funding period. An alternative possibility is that there is heterogeneity in MM cells that preclude the identification of non-MM TME cell type influence. Cytoprofiling of MM cells proposed under Aim 1 will help to identify the heterogeneity in MM cells in each patient which will be integrated into RµC3 data analysis (data on MM cell cytoprofiling will be collected as part of Aim 2 as well).  Again, the course of experimental approach will be modified in years 3-5 to accommodate such changes. The major strength of our approach is the flexibility in assay design and modifications, as well as the ability to re-analyze a large body of quantitative cell feature data obtained.
Validation, reproducibility, and data sharing: Monthly validation of bead-based MM-cell purification will be performed as previously done using flow cytometry to ensure > 95% (typically 97-99%) purity of the CD138+ fraction. Objective clinical metrics and time-windows are established for reproducible assessment of clinical patient response (i.e., complete response, partial response, stable disease and disease progression). Previously optimized and published sample processing parameters will continue to be used. Additionally, all software packages (JEX, R, Weka, and CellProfiler Analyst) are versioned, open-source, and free for download and use. In addition to sharing via publication, all data (de-identified), methods (e.g., protocols, scripts, and workflows), and results (e.g., model training sets) will be available via request and/or download. 
Timeline:




REFERENCES
1. 	Lohr JG, Stojanov P, Carter SL, Cruz-Gordillo P, Lawrence MS, Auclair D, et al. Widespread genetic heterogeneity in multiple myeloma: implications for targeted therapy. Cancer Cell. 2014;25: 91–101.
2. 	Burstein HJ, Mangu PB, Somerfield MR, Schrag D, Samson D, Holt L, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update on the use of chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance assays. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29: 3328–3330.
3. 	Unger FT, Witte I, David KA. Prediction of individual response to anticancer therapy: historical and future perspectives. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015;72: 729–757.
4. 	Pak C, Callander NS, Young EWK, Titz B, Kim K, Saha S, et al. MicroC(3): an ex vivo microfluidic cis-coculture assay to test chemosensitivity and resistance of patient multiple myeloma cells. Integr Biol . 2015;7: 643–654.
5. 	Munshi NC, Anderson KC. New strategies in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19: 3337–3344.
6. 	Chapman MA, Lawrence MS, Keats JJ, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Schinzel AC, et al. Initial genome sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma. Nature. 2011;471: 467–472.
7. 	Bolli N, Avet-Loiseau H, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, Alexandrov LB, Martincorena I, et al. Heterogeneity of genomic evolution and mutational profiles in multiple myeloma. Nat Commun. 2014;5: 2997.
8. 	Wang M, Delasalle K, Giralt S, Alexanian R. Rapid control of previously untreated multiple myeloma with bortezomib–lenalidomide–dexamethasone (BLD). Hematology. 2010;15: 70–73.
9. 	Richardson PG, Weller E, Lonial S, Jakubowiak AJ, Jagannath S, Raje NS, et al. Lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone combination therapy in patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Blood. 2010;116: 679–686.
10. 	Rajkumar SV. Myeloma today: Disease definitions and treatment advances. Am J Hematol. 2016;91: 90–100.
11. 	Kawano Y, Moschetta M, Manier S, Glavey S, Görgün GT, Roccaro AM, et al. Targeting the bone marrow microenvironment in multiple myeloma. Immunol Rev. 2015;263: 160–172.
12. 	Dimopoulos MA, Richardson PG, Moreau P, Anderson KC. Current treatment landscape for relapsed and/or refractory multiple myeloma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015;12: 42–54.
13. 	Asimakopoulos F, Fotis A, Jaehyup K, Denu RA, Chelsea H, Jensen JL, et al. Macrophages in multiple myeloma: emerging concepts and therapeutic implications. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013;54: 2112–2121.
14. 	Hebron E, Hope C, Kim J, Jensen JL, Flanagan C, Bhatia N, et al. MAP3K8 kinase regulates myeloma growth by cell-autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms involving myeloma-associated monocytes/macrophages. Br J Haematol. 2013;160: 779–784.
15. 	Hope C, Ollar SJ, Heninger E, Hebron E, Jensen JL, Kim J, et al. TPL2 kinase regulates the inflammatory milieu of the myeloma niche. Blood. 2014;123: 3305–3315.
16. 	Jensen JL, Rakhmilevich A, Heninger E, Broman AT, Hope C, Phan F, et al. Tumoricidal Effects of Macrophage-Activating Immunotherapy in a Murine Model of Relapsed/Refractory Multiple Myeloma. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015;3: 881–890.
17. 	Jensen JL, Chelsea H, Fotis A. Deploying myeloid cells against myeloma. Oncoimmunology. 2015; 00–00.
18. 	Kim J, Jaehyup K, Denu RA, Dollar BA, Escalante LE, Kuether JP, et al. Macrophages and mesenchymal stromal cells support survival and proliferation of multiple myeloma cells. Br J Haematol. 2012;158: 336–346.
19. 	Wong D, David W, Oliver W, Christina H, Svenja S, Martin S, et al. Eosinophils and Megakaryocytes Support the Early Growth of Murine MOPC315 Myeloma Cells in Their Bone Marrow Niches. PLoS One. 2014;9: e109018.
20. 	Ramachandran IR, Condamine T, Lin C, Herlihy SE, Garfall A, Vogl DT, et al. Bone marrow PMN-MDSCs and neutrophils are functionally similar in protection of multiple myeloma from chemotherapy. Cancer Lett. 2016;371: 117–124.
21. 	Markovina S, Callander NS, O’Connor SL, Xu G, Shi Y, Leith CP, et al. Bone marrow stromal cells from multiple myeloma patients uniquely induce bortezomib resistant NF-kappaB activity in myeloma cells. Mol Cancer. 2010;9: 176.
22. 	Markovina S, Callander NS, O’Connor SL, Kim J, Werndli JE, Raschko M, et al. Bortezomib-resistant nuclear factor-kappaB activity in multiple myeloma cells. Mol Cancer Res. 2008;6: 1356–1364.
23. 	Young EWK, Pak C, Kahl BS, Yang DT, Callander NS, Miyamoto S, et al. Microscale functional cytomics for studying hematologic cancers. Blood. 2012;119: e76–85.
24. 	Meyvantsson I, Ivar M, Warrick JW, Steven H, Allyson S, Beebe DJ. Automated cell culture in high density tubeless microfluidic device arrays. Lab Chip. 2008;8: 717.
25. 	Walker GM, Beebe DJ. A passive pumping method for microfluidic devices. Lab Chip. 2002;2: 131–134.
26. 	Durie BGM, Harousseau J-L, Miguel JS, Bladé J, Barlogie B, Anderson K, et al. International uniform response criteria for multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2006;20: 1467–1473.
27. 	Ugurel S, Schadendorf D, Pföhler C, Neuber K, Thoelke A, Ulrich J, et al. In vitro drug sensitivity predicts response and survival after individualized sensitivity-directed chemotherapy in metastatic melanoma: a multicenter phase II trial of the Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12: 5454–5463.
28. 	Samson DJ. Chemotherapy Sensitivity and Resistance Assays: A Systematic Review. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22: 3618–3630.
29. 	Unger FT, Witte I, David KA. Prediction of individual response to anticancer therapy: historical and future perspectives. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015;72: 729–757.
30. 	Burstein HJ, Mangu PB, Somerfield MR, Schrag D, Samson D, Holt L, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update on the use of chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance assays. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29: 3328–3330.
31. 	Chng WJ, Dispenzieri A, Chim C-S, Fonseca R, Goldschmidt H, Lentzsch S, et al. IMWG consensus on risk stratification in multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2014;28: 269–277.
32. 	Jones TR, Carpenter AE, Lamprecht MR, Jason M, Silver SJ, Grenier JK, et al. Scoring diverse cellular morphologies in image-based screens with iterative feedback and machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2009;106: 1826–1831.
33. 	Arrasate M, Finkbeiner S. Automated microscope system for determining factors that predict neuronal fate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102: 3840–3845.
34. 	Sharma P, Punita S, D.Michael A, Aaron D, Kaye JA, Steven F. High-Throughput Screening in Primary Neurons. Methods in Enzymology. 2012. pp. 331–360.
35. 	Wuerzberger-Davis SM, Chen Y, Yang DT, Kearns JD, Bates PW, Lynch C, et al. Nuclear export of the NF-κB inhibitor IκBα is required for proper B cell and secondary lymphoid tissue formation. Immunity. 2011;34: 188–200.
36. 	Ito T, Ando H, Suzuki T, Ogura T, Hotta K, Imamura Y, et al. Identification of a primary target of thalidomide teratogenicity. Science. 2010;327: 1345–1350.
37. 	Zhu YX, Braggio E, Shi C-X, Bruins LA, Schmidt JE, Van Wier S, et al. Cereblon expression is required for the antimyeloma activity of lenalidomide and pomalidomide. Blood. 2011;118: 4771–4779.
38. 	Krönke J, Udeshi ND, Narla A, Grauman P, Hurst SN, McConkey M, et al. Lenalidomide causes selective degradation of IKZF1 and IKZF3 in multiple myeloma cells. Science. 2014;343: 301–305.
39. 	Liu J, Zhang C, Burnside E, Page D. Learning Heterogeneous Hidden Markov Random Fields. JMLR Workshop Conf Proc. 2014;33: 576–584.
40. 	Liu J, Page D. Bayesian Estimation of Latently-grouped Parameters in Undirected Graphical Models. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2013;2013: 1232–1240.
41. 	Peissig PL, Santos Costa V, Caldwell MD, Rottscheit C, Berg RL, Mendonca EA, et al. Relational machine learning for electronic health record-driven phenotyping. J Biomed Inform. 2014;52: 260–270.
42. 	Weiss JC, Natarajan S, Page D. Multiplicative Forests for Continuous-Time Processes. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012;2012: 467–475.
43. 	Herbst A, Allen H, Sean M, Schmidt JJ, Aiken JM, David Page C, et al. Prion Disease Diagnosis by Proteomic Profiling. J Proteome Res. 2009;8: 1030–1036.
44. 	Schwartz MP, Hou Z, Propson NE, Zhang J, Engstrom CJ, Costa VS, et al. Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural constructs for predicting neural toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112: 12516–12521.
45. 	Toepke MW, Beebe DJ. PDMS absorption of small molecules and consequences in microfluidic applications. Lab Chip. 2006;6: 1484–1486.
46. 	Warrick JW, Timm A, Swick A, Yin J. Tools for Single-Cell Kinetic Analysis of Virus-Host Interactions. PLoS One. 2016;11: e0145081.
47. 	Lohr JG, Adalsteinsson VA, Cibulskis K, Choudhury AD, Rosenberg M, Cruz-Gordillo P, et al. Whole-exome sequencing of circulating tumor cells provides a window into metastatic prostate cancer. Nat Biotechnol. 2014;32: 479–484.
48. 	Ogunniyi AO, Story CM, Papa E, Guillen E, Love JC. Screening individual hybridomas by microengraving to discover monoclonal antibodies. Nat Protoc. 2009;4: 767–782.
49. 	Jones TR, Kang IH, Wheeler DB, Lindquist RA, Papallo A, Sabatini DM, et al. CellProfiler Analyst: data exploration and analysis software for complex image-based screens. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008;9: 482.
50. 	Chaidos A, Barnes CP, Cowan G, May PC, Melo V, Hatjiharissi E, et al. Clinical drug resistance linked to interconvertible phenotypic and functional states of tumor-propagating cells in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2013;121: 318–328.



